
 = Homarus gammarus =

 Homarus gammarus , known as the European lobster or common lobster , is a species of clawed lobster from the eastern Atlantic Ocean , Mediterranean Sea and parts of the Black Sea . It is closely related to the American lobster , H. americanus . It may grow to a length of 60 cm ( 24 in ) and a mass of 6 kilograms ( 13 lb ) , and bears a conspicuous pair of claws . In life , the lobsters are blue , only becoming " lobster red " on cooking . Mating occurs in the summer , producing eggs which are carried by the females for up to a year before hatching into planktonic larvae . Homarus gammarus is a highly esteemed food , and is widely caught using lobster pots , mostly around the British Isles .

 = = Description = =

Homarus gammarus is a large crustacean , with a body length up to 60 centimetres ( 24 in ) and weighing up to 5 – 6 kilograms ( 11 – 13 lb ) , although the lobsters caught in lobster pots are usually 23 – 38 cm ( 9 – 15 in ) long and weigh 0 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 2 kg ( 1 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 9 lb ) . Like other crustaceans , lobsters have a hard exoskeleton which they must shed in order to grow , in a process called ecdysis ( moulting ) . This may occur several times a year for young lobsters , but decreases to once every 1 – 2 years for larger animals .
 The first pair of pereiopods is armed with a large , asymmetrical pair of claws . The larger one is the " crusher " , and has rounded nodules used for crushing prey ; the other is the " cutter " , which has sharp inner edges , and is used for holding or tearing the prey . Usually , the left claw is the crusher , and the right is the cutter .
 The exoskeleton is generally blue above , with spots that coalesce , and yellow below . The red colour associated with lobsters only appears after cooking . This occurs because , in life , the red pigment astaxanthin is bound to a protein complex , but the complex is broken up by the heat of cooking , releasing the red pigment .
 The closest relative of H. gammarus is the American lobster , Homarus americanus . The two species are very similar , and can be crossed artificially , although hybrids are unlikely to occur in the wild since their ranges do not overlap . The two species can be distinguished by a number of characteristics :
 The rostrum of H. americanus bears one or more spines on the underside , which are lacking in H. gammarus .
 The spines on the claws of H. americanus are red or red @-@ tipped , while those of H. gammarus are white or white @-@ tipped .
 The underside of the claw of H. americanus is orange or red , while that of H. gammarus is creamy white or very pale red .

 = = Life cycle = =

 Female H. gammarus reach sexual maturity when they have grown to a carapace length of 80 – 85 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 3 in ) , whereas males mature at a slightly smaller size . Mating typically occurs in summer between a recently moulted female , whose shell is therefore soft , and a hard @-@ shelled male . The female carries the eggs for up to 12 months , depending on the temperature , attached to her pleopods . Females carrying eggs are said to be " berried " and can be found throughout the year .
 The eggs hatch at night , and the larvae swim to the water surface where they drift with the ocean currents , preying on zooplankton . This stage involves three moults and lasts for 15 – 35 days . After the third moult , the juvenile takes on a form closer to the adult , and adopts a benthic lifestyle . The juveniles are rarely seen in the wild , and are poorly known , although they are known to be capable of digging extensive burrows . It is estimated that only 1 larva in every 20 @,@ 000 survives to the benthic phase . When they reach a carapace length of 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) , the juveniles leave their burrows and start their adult lives .

 = = Distribution = =

 Homarus gammarus is found across the north @-@ eastern Atlantic Ocean from northern Norway to the Azores and Morocco , not including the Baltic Sea . It is also present in most of the Mediterranean Sea , only missing from the section east of Crete , and along only the north @-@ west coast of the Black Sea . The northernmost populations are found in the Norwegian fjords Tysfjorden and Nordfolda , inside the Arctic Circle .
 The species can be divided into four genetically distinct populations , one widespread population , and three which have diverged due to small effective population sizes , possibly due to adaptation to the local environment . The first of these is the population of lobsters from northern Norway , which have been referred to as the " midnight @-@ sun lobster " . The populations in the Mediterranean Sea are distinct from those in the Atlantic Ocean . The last distinct population is found in the Netherlands : samples from the Oosterschelde were distinct from those collected in the North Sea or English Channel .
 Attempts have been made to introduce H. gammarus to New Zealand , alongside other European species such as the edible crab , Cancer pagurus . Between 1904 and 1914 , one million lobster larvae were released from hatcheries in Dunedin , but the species did not become established there .

 = = Ecology = =

 Adult H. gammarus live on the continental shelf at depths of 0 – 150 metres ( 0 – 492 ft ) , although not normally deeper than 50 m ( 160 ft ) . They prefer hard substrates , such as rocks or hard mud , and live in holes or crevices , emerging at night to feed .
 The diet of H. gammarus mostly consists of other benthic invertebrates . These include crabs , molluscs , sea urchins , starfish and polychaete worms .
 The three clawed lobster species Homarus gammarus , H. americanus and Nephrops norvegicus are hosts to the three known species of the animal phylum Cycliophora ; the species on H. gammarus has not been described .
 Homarus gammarus is susceptible to the disease gaffkaemia , caused by the bacterium Aerococcus viridans . Although it is frequently found in American lobsters , the disease has only been seen in captive H. gammarus , where prior occupation of the tanks by H. americanus could not be ruled out .

 = = Human consumption = =

 Homarus gammarus is traditionally " highly esteemed " as a foodstuff and was mentioned in " The Crabfish " a seventeenth century English folk song . It may fetch very high prices and may be sold fresh , frozen , canned or powdered . Both the claws and the abdomen of H. gammarus contain " excellent " white meat , and most of the contents of the cephalothorax are edible . The exceptions are the gastric mill and the " sand vein " ( gut ) . The price of H. gammarus is up to three times higher than that of H. americanus , and the European species is considered to have a better flavour .
 Lobsters are mostly fished using lobster pots , although lines baited with octopus or cuttlefish sometimes succeed in tempting them out , to allow them to be caught in a net or by hand . In 2008 , 4 @,@ 386 t of H. gammarus were caught across Europe and North Africa , of which 3 @,@ 462 t ( 79 % ) was caught in the British Isles ( including the Channel Islands ) . The minimum landing size for H. gammarus is a carapace length of 87 mm ( 3 @.@ 4 in ) .
 Aquaculture systems for H. gammarus are under development , and production rates are still very low .

 = = Taxonomic history = =

 Homarus gammarus was first given a binomial name by Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae , published in 1758 . That name was Cancer gammarus , since Linnaeus ' concept of the genus Cancer at that time included all large crustaceans .
 H. gammarus is the type species of the genus Homarus Weber , 1795 , as determined by Direction 51 of the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature . Prior to that direction , confusion arose because the species had been referred to by several different names , including Astacus marinus Fabricius , 1775 and Homarus vulgaris H. Milne @-@ Edwards , 1837 , and also because Friedrich Weber 's description of the genus had been overlooked until rediscovered by Mary Rathbun , rendering any prior assignments of type species ( for Homarus H. Milne @-@ Edwards , 1837 ) invalid for Homarus Weber , 1795 .
 The type specimen of Homarus gammarus was a lectotype selected by Lipke Holthuis in 1974 . It came from 57 ° 53 ′ N 11 ° 32 ′ E , near Marstrand , Sweden ( 48 kilometres or 30 miles northwest of Gothenburg ) , but both it and the paralectotypes have since been lost .
 The common name for H. gammarus preferred by the Food and Agriculture Organization is " European lobster " , but the species is also widely known as the " common lobster " .


 = Frank Headlam =

 Air Vice Marshal Frank Headlam , CB , CBE ( 15 July 1914 – 23 December 1976 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born and educated in Tasmania , he joined the RAAF as an air cadet in January 1934 . He specialised in flying instruction and navigation before the outbreak of World War II . In April 1941 , he became commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron , which operated Lockheed Hudsons . The squadron was deployed to Dutch Timor in December , and saw action against Japanese forces in the South West Pacific . After returning to Australia in February 1942 , Headlam held staff appointments and training commands , finishing the war a group captain .
 Headlam served as Officer Commanding North @-@ Western Area in 1946 , and as Director of Training from 1947 to 1950 . In 1950 – 51 , during the Malayan Emergency , he was stationed at Singapore as commander of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing and , later , RAF Tengah . He twice served as acting Air Member for Personnel , in 1957 and 1959 – 60 , receiving appointment as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1958 . Promoted air vice marshal , he successively held the positions of Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Operational Command in 1961 – 62 , AOC No. 224 Group RAF from 1962 to 1965 during the Indonesia – Malaysia Konfrontasi , Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in 1965 – 66 , and AOC Support Command in 1966 – 67 . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1965 . Following a posting to London as Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff from 1968 to 1971 , he retired from the Air Force and died in Melbourne five years later .

 = = Early career = =

 The son of farmers Malcolm and Hilda Headlam , Frank Headlam was born on 15 July 1914 in Launceston , Tasmania . He was schooled at Clemes College , Hobart , and matriculated in 1932 . Against the wishes of his parents he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as an air cadet on 16 January 1934 . He underwent flying instruction with No. 1 Flying Training School ( FTS ) at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , and was commissioned as a pilot officer on 1 January 1935 .
 After completing a conversion course , Headlam was assigned to the Seaplane Squadron at Point Cook . No larger than a flight according to the official history of the pre @-@ war RAAF , Seaplane Squadron was part of No. 1 FTS and operated Supermarine Southampton flying boats and de Havilland Gipsy Moth floatplanes , among other types . During this posting Headlam was promoted to flying officer , on 1 July 1935 , and wrote a paper on national defence in which he suggested that with " strong air forces , naval forces ( including submarines ) , and fixed defences , Australia may be made practically invulnerable " . According to Air Force historian Alan Stephens , this paper " in effect , defined the ' anti @-@ lodgment ' concept which has been a persistent feature of RAAF strategic thinking " .
 Headlam completed a flying instructors course in July 1936 and joined the staff of No. 1 FTS . He was promoted to flight lieutenant on 1 March 1937 . Commencing in July 1938 , he was one of six students to take part in the RAAF 's first Long Specialist Navigation Course , run by Flight Lieutenants Bill Garing and Alister Murdoch at Point Cook . The course involved several epic training flights that attracted considerable media attention , including a twelve @-@ day , 10 @,@ 800 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @,@ 700 mi ) round @-@ Australia trip by three Avro Ansons , one of which was piloted by Headlam , in November . The following month , Headlam led the three Ansons on a six @-@ day journey back and forth over Central Australia . He subsequently passed the navigation course with a special distinction . On 27 January 1939 he was posted to RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , as a flight commander . He served initially with No. 2 Squadron , before transferring to No. 1 Squadron on 29 August . Both units operated Ansons .

 = = World War II = =

 Following the outbreak of World War II , No. 1 Squadron was engaged in convoy escort and maritime reconnaissance duties off south @-@ eastern Australia . Headlam continued to serve with the squadron as a flight commander until 15 January 1940 , when he was assigned to Headquarters Laverton as the station navigation officer . On 27 March he was posted to the staff of RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . He was promoted to squadron leader on 1 June 1940 . Two weeks later he married Katherine Bridge at St Paul 's Anglican Church in Frankston ; the couple would have a son and a daughter .
 Headlam was given command of No. 2 Squadron at Laverton on 15 April 1941 , and raised to wing commander on 1 July . Equipped with Lockheed Hudsons , the squadron mainly conducted maritime patrols in southern waters until 5 December , when four of its aircraft were ordered to Darwin , Northern Territory , in response to fears of Japanese aggression in the Pacific . On 7 December , this detachment established itself at Penfui , near Koepang in Dutch Timor , while No. 2 Squadron 's eight remaining Hudsons were stationed at Darwin on standby . The following day , aware that Australia was now at war in the Pacific , one of the Penfui @-@ based Hudsons attacked the Japanese pearler Nanyo Maru , which was suspected of being a radio ship , and forced it aground . By 12 December , Headlam had transferred to Penfui as commanding officer of the base , as well as No. 2 Squadron .
 During January 1942 , No. 2 Squadron 's aircraft were dispersed at Penfui , Boeroe Island , and Darwin . The Penfui detachment attacked Japanese shipping taking part in the invasion of Celebes . Two Hudsons shot down or damaged three Japanese floatplanes that attacked them as they were bombing a transport ship on 11 January ; the next day both Hudsons were themselves shot down by Mitsubishi Zeros . Penfui was bombed by the Japanese for the first time on 26 January 1942 , and attacked regularly thereafter , damaging some aircraft . The intact Hudsons were withdrawn to Darwin but Headlam and his staff remained at Penfui to enable the base to be used by aircraft during reconnaissance missions from Australia . On 18 February , Headlam was ordered to evacuate all his personnel except a small party to demolish the airfield with assistance from Sparrow Force . He returned to Darwin the following day , just as the city experienced its first raid by the Japanese . Four of No. 2 Squadron 's Hudsons were destroyed in the attack ; the remainder were relocated to Daly Waters , where they continued to carry out reconnaissance and bombing missions against Japanese targets in Timor .
 Headlam remained in Darwin as Controller of Operations at Headquarters North @-@ Western Area Command until 12 May 1942 , when he was posted to Nhill , Victoria , as commanding officer of No. 2 Air Navigation School , operating Ansons . No. 97 ( Reserve ) Squadron was formed from the school 's personnel in June . On 20 July 1943 , Headlam took command of No. 2 Air Observer School ( AOS ) , also operating Ansons , at Mount Gambier , South Australia . He was promoted to group captain on 1 December 1943 , and was appointed the inaugural commanding officer of No. 3 AOS , operating Ansons and Fairey Battles out of Port Pirie , on 9 December . After handing over command of No. 3 AOS , he commenced studies at RAAF Staff School in Mount Martha , Victoria , on 2 October 1944 . He was appointed senior administrative staff officer at North @-@ Western Area Command on 12 January 1945 .

 = = Post @-@ war career = =

 Headlam became Officer Commanding North @-@ Western Area in January 1946 . Posted to Britain at the end of the year , he attended the Royal Air Force Staff College , Andover , and served with RAAF Overseas Headquarters , London . On his return to Australia , in November 1947 , he became Director of Training at RAAF Headquarters . In November 1950 , Headlam was appointed to take over command of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing from Group Captain Paddy Heffernan . Headquartered at RAF Changi , Singapore , No. 90 Wing controlled RAAF units operating during the Malayan Emergency : No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron , flying Avro Lincolns , and No. 38 ( Transport ) Squadron , flying Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas . The Lincolns conducted area bombing missions over communist @-@ held territory , as well as strikes against pinpoint targets . The Dakotas were tasked with courier flights , VIP transport and medical evacuations across South East Asia , and in Malaya with airlifting troops and cargo , dropping supplies to friendly forces and despatching propaganda leaflets . Headlam was slightly injured on 20 December , when a No. 38 Squadron Dakota he was co @-@ piloting on a supply drop crash @-@ landed at Kampong Aur in Pahang , following engine failure . In August 1951 he was named commander of RAF Tengah , Singapore , in addition to his post as commanding officer of No. 90 Wing . Headlam handed over command of No. 90 Wing in December 1951 .
 On 19 February 1952 , Headlam became senior air staff officer ( SASO ) at Eastern Area Command in Penrith , New South Wales . During his term as SASO , the RAAF began re @-@ equipping with English Electric Canberra jet bombers and CAC Sabre jet fighters . The Air Force also underwent a major organisational change , as it transitioned from a geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system to one based on function , resulting in the establishment of Home ( operational ) , Training , and Maintenance Commands . Eastern Area Command , considered a de facto operational headquarters owing to the preponderance of combat units under its control , was reorganised as Home Command in October 1953 . Headlam was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 1954 New Year Honours for his " exceptional ability and devotion to duty " . He was promoted to acting air commodore in May . His appointment as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Queen Elizabeth II was announced on 7 October 1954 .
 Headlam was promoted to substantive air commodore on 1 January 1955 . In November he was posted to RAAF Overseas Headquarters , London , and the following year undertook studies at the Imperial Defence College . Returning to Australia , he served as acting Air Member for Personnel at the Department of Air , Canberra , from 19 March to 21 October 1957 , between the terms of Air Vice Marshals Fred Scherger and Allan Walters , and again from 24 August 1959 to 28 March 1960 , between the terms of Walters and Air Vice Marshal Bill Hely . In this role Headlam occupied a seat on the Air Board , the service 's controlling body that comprised its senior officers and was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . He was also one of two RAAF representatives to serve on a committee , chaired by businessman William John Allison , examining conditions of defence service ; the committee 's recommendations led to a doubling of flight pay , among other improvements . Headlam 's other positions at the Department of Air included Air Commodore Plans from October 1957 to January 1959 , and Director General Plans and Policy from January to August 1959 . The latter assignment put him in charge of the RAAF 's Directorate of Intelligence . Headlam was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 1958 Queen 's Birthday Honours , gazetted on 3 June . In May 1960 he became acting Deputy Chief of the Air Staff .
 On 30 January 1961 , Headlam joined the staff of Operational Command ( OPCOM ) , the successor organisation to Home Command , responsible for the direction of RAAF operational units . He took over as Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) OPCOM from Air Vice Marshal Val Hancock in April . Headlam was promoted to air vice marshal on 29 May . On 17 July 1962 , he was posted to RAAF Base Butterworth , Malaya , and took up the appointment of AOC No. 224 Group RAF in Singapore one week later . He was succeeded as AOC OPCOM by Air Vice Marshal Alister Murdoch . As AOC No. 224 Group , Headlam had overall responsibility for regional air defence and offensive air operations during the Brunei Rebellion in December 1962 , and the subsequent Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia that officially began the following month . Divorced from his first wife in 1956 , he married widowed social worker Vernon Spence at the Sydney registry office on 20 January 1964 . He handed over No. 224 Group to Air Vice Marshal Christopher Foxley @-@ Norris on 30 November .
 Returning to Australia , Headlam became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) on 26 January 1965 . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) " in recognition of distinguished service in the Borneo Territories " on 22 June . His tenure as DCAS coincided with the most significant rearmament program the Air Force had undertaken since World War II , and with manpower shortages stemming from this expansion and from Australia 's increasing involvement in the security of South East Asia . The first RAAF helicopters were committed to the Vietnam War towards the end of his term , and he travelled to Saigon with the Chief of the General Staff , Lieutenant General Sir John Wilton , in March 1966 to plan the deployment . The year before , Wilton had recommended to Air Marshal Murdoch , the Chief of the Air Staff , that two Iroquois be sent to Vietnam for familiarisation purposes ; Murdoch had rebuffed Wilton , and the RAAF helicopter squadron was considered underprepared for its army co @-@ operation role when it finally did deploy . Headlam succeeded Air Vice Marshal Douglas Candy as AOC Support Command , Melbourne , on 8 August 1966 . Support Command had been formed in 1959 , by merging the RAAF 's former Training and Maintenance Commands . On 1 January 1968 , Headlam was posted to London as Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff . He served as an Extra Gentleman Usher to the Queen from 17 November 1970 to 5 June 1971 .

 = = Retirement = =

 Returning to Australia in June 1971 , Headlam took resettlement leave before retiring from the Air Force on 3 August . He made his home in Melbourne , where he died aged 62 on 23 December 1976 , after a lengthy battle with cancer . Survived by his children and his second wife , he was given a private funeral and cremated at Springvale Crematorium .


 = M @-@ 82 ( Michigan highway ) =

 M @-@ 82 is a state trunkline in the Lower Peninsula in the US state of Michigan that travels between Fremont and Howard City . The section between Newaygo and Howard City travels through Fremont and along the southern edge of Manistee National Forest . The current version of M @-@ 82 is actually the second in the state ; the first usage appeared in the Upper Peninsula by 1919 . The Lower Peninsula routing has been in use since the 1920s . Various extensions and truncations have shifted the terminus as far west as New Era or Hesperia in the past . The current route was finalized in the late 1970s

 = = Route description = =

 M @-@ 82 begins at a junction with M @-@ 120 and B @-@ 96 west of Fremont . This junction is at a tripoint of county lines . M @-@ 120 forms the north – south Newaygo – Oceana and Newaygo – Muskegon county lines . B @-@ 96 , which forms the east – west Oceana – Muskegon county line runs due west of the intersection . M @-@ 82 exits the intersection to the east . The highway runs along 48th Street through rural farms into the community of Fremont . The road , now called Main Street , passes through the downtown area and M @-@ 82 turns south along Stewart Avenue out of town . The highway rounds a curve and transitions to 72nd Street running eastward through more farm land . As the trunkline approaches Newaygo , the terrain becomes more wooded near the Muskegon River . M @-@ 82 follows Fremont Street east to a junction with M @-@ 37 . The two highways merge and run concurrently over the river and into downtown on State Street . South of downtown , M @-@ 82 turns east again , independent of M @-@ 37 , and runs along 82nd Street on the southern edge of the Manistee National Forest . The east end of M @-@ 82 is at exit 118 on US 131 / M @-@ 46 west of Howard City .
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , as a part of its maintenance responsibilities , tracks the volume of traffic using its roadways . These levels are expressed in terms of a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a calculation of the traffic along a segment of road for any average day of the year . In 2009 , the department 's measurements indicated that a segment of M @-@ 82 west of Fremont had the peak volume for the highway at 16 @,@ 532 vehicles daily . The traffic nadir was 4 @,@ 018 vehicles east of Newaygo . In addition , MDOT has not had any section of the highway listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility .

 = = History = =


 = = = Previous designation = = =

 The first usage of M @-@ 82 was in the Upper Peninsula by July 1 , 1919 . The trunkline started at M @-@ 25 and ran north of Newberry to the vicinity of Eight Mile Corner . It was later replaced by M @-@ 48 in 1926 .

 = = = Current designation = = =

 The current M @-@ 82 dates back to 1926 . It ran from US 31 in Hart to the northern junction of US 131 and M @-@ 46 in Howard City . The highway was routed through Ferry , Hesperia and Fremont , replacing M @-@ 41 . In late 1936 , M @-@ 46 was extended along the section between Newaygo and Howard City , forming a M @-@ 46 / M @-@ 82 concurrency to fill a gap in the M @-@ 46 routing . This concurrent section became just M @-@ 46 in 1938 , shortening M @-@ 82 back to the northern M @-@ 37 junction in Newaygo . The highway was moved to a new alignment west of Ferry in late 1947 or early 1948 . Instead of heading northwesterly to Hart , it was continued west to end in Shelby .
 Two realignments in 1963 and 1964 rerouted the western end of the highway again . This time it was realigned to run from Hesperia to New Era , bypassing Ferry . A larger change around 1969 reconfigured the highway designations in Oceana County . M @-@ 20 replaced M @-@ 82 west of Hesperia , to end at New Era instead of Muskegon . The new M @-@ 120 designation replaced M @-@ 20 south of Hesperia . M @-@ 82 now ran from Hesperia to Newaygo only . The length of the highway was increased in 1973 when the eastern end was moved back to Howard City . M @-@ 46 was rerouted to follow the US 131 freeway south of Howard City to Cedar Springs , and replaced M @-@ 57 between Cedar Springs and Casnovia . This freed up the Newaygo to Howard City highway for a return to the M @-@ 82 designation . The last change came in 1978 when the concurrency with M @-@ 120 was eliminated in favor of M @-@ 120 . The M @-@ 82 designation was truncated at this time to the junction west of Fremont , resulting in the current highway routing .

 = = Major intersections = =



 = Shikamaru Nara =

 Shikamaru Nara ( 奈良 シカマル , Nara Shikamaru ) is a fictional character in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto . In the anime and manga , Shikamaru is a ninja affiliated with the village of Konohagakure . He is a member of Team 10 , a group of ninja consisting of himself , Choji Akimichi , Ino Yamanaka , and team leader Asuma Sarutobi . Shikamaru is portrayed as a lazy character , unwilling to apply his prodigious intelligence ; Kishimoto has noted that he likes Shikamaru due to his easygoing nature . Outside of the Naruto anime and manga , Shikamaru has appeared in four of the feature films in the series , as well as several other media relating to the series , including video games and original video animations .
 Numerous anime and manga publications have commented on Shikamaru 's character . Many reviewers commented on his laziness and intelligence , and noted his transformation into a leader ; Anime News Network celebrated Shikamaru 's emergence as " an unlikely hero " in the Naruto storyline . Shikamaru has also been highly popular with the Naruto reader base , placing high in several popularity polls . Merchandise based on Shikamaru has been released , including action figures , key chains , and patches .

 = = Creation and conception = =

 Masashi Kishimoto has noted that he likes Shikamaru due to his easygoing nature despite being a genius , and contrasted him against Sasuke Uchiha 's intelligent but abrasive personality . Kishimoto also comically remarked that he would marry Shikamaru if he were a girl , noting that Shikamaru would likely be successful in life . When designing Shikamaru 's Part II appearance , Kishimoto wanted to give Shikamaru a unique appearance despite drawing him with a vest that several other ninja wear in the series . As a result , he drew his forehead protector on his arm in order to not obscure his hair .

 = = Appearances = =


 = = = In Naruto = = =

 Shikamaru first major appearance in the series is during the Chunin Exams , bi @-@ yearly exams for ninja who wish to advance in rank . He is part of Team 10 alongside Choji Akimichi and Ino Yamanaka . He is a highly unenthusiastic person , and he attempts to go through life with minimum effort . Contrary to his lazy tendencies , Shikamaru is extremely intelligent ; his teacher , Asuma Sarutobi , determined that Shikamaru 's IQ was over 200 . Shikamaru 's abilities are based on the Shadow Imitation Technique ( 影真似の術 , Kagemane no Jutsu , English TV : " Shadow Possession Jutsu " ) , the signature technique of his clan , with which he merges his shadow with an opponent 's shadow , making them immobilized and forced to mimic Shikamaru 's movements . As the series progresses , Shikamaru becomes able to manipulate his shadow in new ways . By Part II of the series , Shikamaru is capable of utilizing multiple shadow @-@ based techniques at once and can lift his shadow from the ground in order to interact with physical objects ; for instance , he can pierce enemies with the shadow tendrils or use them to throw weapons .
 Shikamaru approaches the exams with a sense of apathy ; when he battles the Sunagakure ninja Temari , he defeats her but forfeits his match to her , due to his chakra being low . Despite this loss , he is the only ninja among his peers to be promoted to the rank of Chunin , as the overseers of the exams were impressed by the insight and intelligence he demonstrated against Temari . As a Chunin , Shikamaru is appointed the leader of a team to prevent Sasuke Uchiha from defecting to the village of Otogakure . Although Shikamaru 's team manages to defeat the Otogakure ninja barring their way , Sasuke manages to escape .
 In Part II of the series , Shikamaru is assigned the task of locating two members of the criminal organization Akatsuki . While his team manages to find their targets , the immortal Akatsuki member Hidan kills Asuma Sarutobi during the course of the battle despite Shikamaru 's best efforts . After Asuma 's funeral , Shikamaru sets out with the surviving members of Team 10 to avenge their mentor with the aid of Kakashi Hatake . As the other deal with Hidan 's partner Kakuzu , Shikamaru avenges Asuma by defeating Hidan and making sure the Akatsuki member 's body is never found . Following the fight , Shikamaru vows to protect Kurenai Yuhi and Asuma 's newborn daughter . He is later assigned to the Fourth Division alongside Temari and Chōji . He is named a proxy general under Gaara . In the series epilogue , stating his personal desire during the series of final battles , Shikamaru becomes advisor to the Seventh Hokage Naruto after marrying Temari and gaining a son in Shikadai Nara .

 = = = Appearances in other media = = =

 Besides the Naruto anime and manga , Shikamaru is featured in seven of the featured films in the series : in the second film , he aids Naruto Uzumaki and Sakura Haruno in fighting against Haido , a utopian idealist seeking to rule the world with a power called Gelel ; in the fourth , Shikamaru appears in a brief sequence , fighting against a large group of stone soldiers ; in the fifth , Shikamaru is sent alongside Kakashi and Sai in search of the base of the Land of Sky , who plans to invade Konoha ; in the sixth , Shikamaru , alongside Sakura and Sai battle the chimera beast summoned by Hiruko ; in the eight , Shikamaru participates in the battle against the demon Satori ; in the ninth , the Limited Tsukuyomi universe presents a portly Shikamaru , the exact opposite of his teammate , Choji , who becomes the team strategist instead ; and in the tenth , Shikamaru leads the team consisting of himself , Naruto , Sakura , Sai , and Hinata Hyuga that is sent to rescue Hinata 's younger sister , Hanabi , who was kidnapped by Toneri Otsutsuki . He is also present in the third original video animation , in which he participates in a tournament . Shikamaru is a playable character in nearly all Naruto video games , including the Clash of Ninja series and the Ultimate Ninja series . In some games , he utilizes variations of his Shadow Imitation Technique not seen in the anime or manga . Naruto Shippūden : Gekitō Ninja Taisen ! EX 2 marks the first appearance of Shikamaru in his Part II appearance in a video game .
 A light novel titled Shikamaru Hiden : A Cloud Drifting in Silent Darkness , written by Takashi Yano and illustrated by Kishimoto , stars Shikamaru as the main character and narrator . The novel is set two years after the Fourth Ninja War , focusing on Shikamaru 's assignment as organizer of the newly formed Shinobi Union to capture a rogue ninja who rules over the distant Land of Silence and attempts to establish a new world order ruled by the common people . It also explores his growing relationship with Temari , culminating in him struggling to name his child with her , years after the end of the novel .

 = = Reception = =

 Shikamaru has ranked highly in the Weekly Shōnen Jump popularity polls for the series , continuously placing in the top ten and reaching fourth place in one poll . The last such poll was in 2011 , in which Shikamaru was in ninth place , behind Sasori and ahead of Hinata . Merchandise based on Shikamaru has also been released , including action figures , key chains , and patches in both his Part I and Part II appearance . NTT customers voted him as their sixteenth favorite black haired male anime character . CyberConnect2 CEO Hiroshi Matsuyama referred to Shikamaru as one of his favorite characters from Naruto .
 Several publications for manga , anime , video games , and other related media have commented on Shikamaru 's character . IGN stated that Shikamaru was one of their favorite characters in the series , and referred to him as " the poster child for any card @-@ carrying member of Generation X " due to his general lack of enthusiasm and his unwillingness to utilize his potential . In a review of episode 110 , IGN praised how Shikamaru managed to transcend his lazy nature in order to take on the mantle of a leader when assigned to lead a team in order to retrieve Sasuke Uchiha and agreed that the decision to make him Chunin was fair . Anime News Network also commented on this development , calling Shikamaru 's emergence as " an unlikely hero " one of the highlights of the arc . In a subsequent review of episode 135 , in which the mission to retrieve Sasuke has failed and the members of Shikamaru 's team were critically injured , IGN lauded the " great moment " in the episode in which Shikamaru began to cry after learning his friends will recover , and declared that he will be a better leader for the sake of his friends . Mania Entertainment 's Justin Rich celebrated his " sheer intellect " , calling him " one of the most fascinating characters in the series " and " one of the few truly brilliant fighters in shōnen anime " . Dani Moure , another reviewer from the same site , noted about his battle with Temari during the Chunin Exams that it was " one of the better fights involving the supporting players " .


 = Meridian , Mississippi =

 Meridian is the sixth largest city in the state of Mississippi , in the United States . It is the county seat of Lauderdale County and the principal city of the Meridian , Mississippi Micropolitan Statistical Area . Along major highways , the city is 93 mi ( 150 km ) east of Jackson , Mississippi ; 154 mi ( 248 km ) west of Birmingham , Alabama ; 202 mi ( 325 km ) northeast of New Orleans , Louisiana ; and 231 mi ( 372 km ) southeast of Memphis , Tennessee .
 Established in 1860 , at the intersection of the Mobile and Ohio Railroad and Southern Railway of Mississippi , Meridian 's economy was built on the railways and goods transported on them , and it became a strategic trading center . During the American Civil War , General William Tecumseh Sherman burned much of the city to the ground in the Battle of Meridian ( February , 1864 ) .
 Rebuilt after the war , the city entered a " Golden Age " it become the largest city in Mississippi between 1890 and 1930 , and a leading center for manufacturing in the South , with 44 trains arriving and departing daily . Union Station , built in 1906 , is now a multi @-@ modal center , giving access to the Meridian Transit System , Greyhound Buses , and Trailways , averaging 242 @,@ 360 passengers per year . Although the economy slowed with the decline of the railroad industry , the city has diversified , with healthcare , military , and manufacturing employing the most people in 2010 . The population within the city limits , according to 2008 census estimates , is 38 @,@ 232 , but a population of 232 @,@ 900 in a 45 @-@ mile ( 72 km ) radius and 526 @,@ 500 in a 65 @-@ mile ( 105 km ) radius , of which 104 @,@ 600 and 234 @,@ 200 people respectively are in the labor force , feed the economy of the city .
 The area is served by two military facilities , Naval Air Station Meridian and Key Field , which provide over 4 @,@ 000 jobs . NAS Meridian is home to the Regional Counter @-@ Drug Training Academy ( RCTA ) and the first local Department of Homeland Security in the state . Key Field is named after brothers Fred and Al Key , who set a world endurance flight record in 1935 . The field is now home to the 186th Air Refueling Wing of the Air National Guard and a support facility for the 185th Aviation Brigade of the Army National Guard . Rush Foundation Hospital is the largest non @-@ military employer in the region , employing 2 @,@ 610 people .
 Among the city 's many arts organizations and historic buildings are the Riley Center , the Meridian Museum of Art , Meridian Little Theatre , and the Meridian Symphony Orchestra . Meridian was home to two Carnegie libraries , one for whites and one for African Americans . The Carnegie Branch Library , now demolished , was one of a number of Carnegie libraries built for blacks in the Southern United States during the segregation era .
 The city has been selected as the future location of the Mississippi Arts and Entertainment Center ( MAEC ) . Jimmie Rodgers , the " Father of Country Music " , was born in Meridian . Highland Park houses a museum which displays memorabilia of his life and career , as well as railroad equipment from the steam @-@ engine era . The park is also home to the Highland Park Dentzel Carousel , a National Historic Landmark . It is the world 's only two @-@ row stationary Dentzel menagerie in existence . Other notable natives include Miss America 1986 Susan Akin , James Chaney – an activist who was killed in the Mississippi civil rights workers murders in 1964 , and Hartley Peavey , founder of Peavey Electronics headquartered in Meridian . The federal courthouse was the site of the 1966 @-@ 1967 trial of suspects in the murder of Chaney and two other activists ; it was the first time a white jury convicted a white official of a civil rights killing .

 = = History = =

 Previously inhabited by the Choctaw Native Americans , the area now called Meridian was obtained by the United States under the terms of the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek in 1830 during the period of Indian Removal . After the treaty was ratified , European @-@ American settlers began to move into the area .
 After receiving a federal land grant of about 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 ha ) , Richard McLemore , the first settler of Meridian , began offering free land to newcomers to attract more settlers to the region and develop the area . Most of McLemore 's land was bought in 1853 by Lewis A. Ragsdale , a lawyer from Alabama . John T. Ball , a merchant from Kemper County , bought the remaining 80 acres ( 0 @.@ 32 km2 ) . Ragsdale and Ball , now known as the founders of the city , began laying out lots for new development on their respective land sections .
 There was much competition over the proposed name of the settlement . Ball and the more industrial residents of the city supported the name " Meridian , " believing the term to be synonymous with " junction " ; the more agrarian residents of the city preferred " Sowashee " ( meaning " mad river " in a Native American language ) , from the name of a nearby creek ; and Ragsdale proposed " Ragsdale City . " Ball erected a station house on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad – the sign on which would alternate between " Meridian " and " Sowashee " each day . Eventually the continued development of the railroads led to an influx of railroad workers who overruled the others in the city and left " Meridian " on the station permanently . The town was officially incorporated as Meridian on February 10 , 1860 .
 Meridian was a small village at the start of the American Civil War in 1861 . Its strategic position at the railroad junction led to the Confederate construction of several military installations to support the war . During the Battle of Meridian in 1864 , General William Tecumseh Sherman led troops into the city , destroying the railroads in every direction , as well as an arsenal and immense storehouses ; his forces burned much of the buildings to the ground . Sherman is reported to have said afterwards , " Meridian , with its depots , store @-@ houses , arsenal , hospitals , offices , hotels , and cantonments no longer exists . " Despite the destruction , the railroad lines in the city were rapidly repaired , back in operation 26 working days after the battle . Race relations remained tense during the Reconstruction era , with the riot of 1871 following a fire that damaged many businesses .
 The town boomed in the aftermath of the Civil War , and experienced its " Golden Age " from 1880 to 1910 . The railroads in the area provided for a means of transportation and an influx of industries , which caused a population boom . As the population rose , commercial activity increased in the downtown area . Between 1890 and 1930 , Meridian was the largest city in Mississippi and a leading center for manufacturing in the South . Many of the city 's historic buildings were built during and just after this era , including the Grand Opera House in 1890 , the Wechsler School in 1894 , two Carnegie libraries in 1913 , and the Threefoot Building , Meridian 's tallest skyscraper , in 1929 .
 The city continued to grow thanks to a commission government 's efforts to bring in 90 new industrial plants in 1913 and a booming automobile industry in the 1920s . Even through the stock market crash of 1929 and the following Great Depression , the city continued to attract new businesses . With escapism becoming popular in the culture during the depth of the Depression , the S. H. Kress & Co. building , built to " provide luxury to the common man , " opened in downtown Meridian , as did the Temple Theater , which was used as a movie house . The federal courthouse was built in 1933 as a WPA project .
 After a brief slowdown of the economy at the end of the Depression , the country entered World War II , which renewed the importance of railroads . The rails were essential to transport gasoline and scrap metal to build military vehicles , so Meridian became the region 's rail center again . This renewed prosperity continued until the 1950s , when the automobile and Interstate Highway System became more popular than passenger rails . The decline of the railroad industry caused significant job losses , resulting in a population decline as workers left for other areas .
 During the American Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s , Meridian was home to a Council of Federated Organizations ( COFO ) office and several other activist organizations . James Chaney and other local residents , along with Michael Schwerner , his wife Rita , and Andrew Goodman , volunteers from the North , worked to create a community center , holding classes to help prepare African Americans in the area to regain the power to vote . Whites in the area resented the activism , and racial tension often resulted in violence . In June 1964 , Chaney , Schwerner , and Goodman went to Neshoba County , Mississippi , to meet with members of a black church that had been bombed and burned . The three disappeared that night on their way back to Meridian . Following a massive FBI investigation , their murdered bodies were found two months later , buried in an earthen dam .
 Seven Klansmen , including a deputy sheriff , were convicted in the federal courthouse in Meridian of " depriving the victims of their civil rights " and three were acquitted in the Mississippi civil rights workers murders trial . It was the first time that a white jury had convicted " a white official in a civil rights killing . " In 2005 , the case was reopened by the state , which brought charges in the case for the first time . Edgar Ray Killen was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to 60 years in prison . Meridian later honored Chaney by renaming a portion of 49th Avenue after him and holding an annual memorial service .
 Starting in the 1960s and following the construction of highways that made commuting easier , residents began to move away from downtown in favor of new housing subdivisions to the north . After strip commercial interests began to move downtown , the city worked to designate several areas as historic districts in the 1970s and 80s to preserve the architectural character of the city . The Meridian Historic Districts and Landmarks Commission was created in 1979 , and the Meridian Main Street program was founded in 1985 .
 Meridian Main Street organized several projects to revitalize downtown , including the construction of a new Amtrak Station in 1997 based on the design of the historic train station used during Meridian 's Golden Age ; it had been demolished . Other projects included the renovation of the Rosenbaum Building in 2001 and Weidmann 's Restaurant in 2002 , as well as support for integrated urban design . Meridian Main Street , along with The Riley Foundation , helped renovate and adapt the historic Grand Opera House in 2006 for use as the " Mississippi State University Riley Center for Education and the Performing Arts . "
 After ownership of the Meridian Main Street was transferred to the Alliance for Downtown Meridian in late 2007 , the two organizations , along with the Meridian Downtown Association , spearheaded the downtown revitalization effort . The Alliance serves as an umbrella organization , allowing the other two organizations to use the its support staff and housing , and in turn the Alliance serves as a liaison between the organizations . Plans were underway to renovate the Threefoot Building , but newly elected Mayor Cheri Barry killed the plans in early 2010 . Today , the Alliance helps to promote further development and restoration downtown ; its goal is to assist businesses such as specialty shops , restaurants , and bars because these help downtown become more active during the day and at night . The Meridian Downtown Association is primarily focused on increasing foot traffic downtown by organizing special events , and the Meridian Main Street program supports existing businesses downtown .

 = = = Hotels = = =

 Given Meridian 's site as a railroad junction , its travelers have attracted the development of many hotels . Even before Meridian reached its " Golden Age , " several large hotels , including the Great Southern and the Grand Avenue hotels , were built before the start of the 20th century . With the growth of the railroads and the construction of the original Union Station in 1906 , many hotels were constructed for passengers and workers . The Elmira Hotel was constructed in 1905 , and the Terminal Hotel was constructed in 1910 . Hotel Meridian was constructed in 1907 , and Union Hotel was built in 1908 . Union Hotel was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979 , and both Hotel Meridian and Grand Avenue Hotel were listed as contributing properties to the Meridian Urban Center Historic District .
 As the city grew , the hotels reflected ambitions of the strong economy , as evidenced by the eleven @-@ story skyscraper Lamar Hotel built in 1927 . Listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979 , the Lamar Hotel was adapted for use as a county annex building . In 1988 it was listed as a Mississippi Landmark .
 The E.F. Young Hotel was built in 1931 . A staple in the African @-@ American business district that developed west of the city 's core , the hotel was one of the only places in the city during the years of segregation where a traveling African American could find a room .
 As the city suburbs developed in the 1960s and ' 70s , most hotels moved outside of downtown . Rehabilitation of the Riley Center in 2006 has increased demand and a push for a new downtown hotel . The Threefoot Building has been proposed for redevelopment for this purpose , but restoration efforts stalled with a change in city administrations . The Threefoot Preservation Society was formed in 2013 to raise public awareness and support for the building 's renovation , featuring tours of the first floor and anniversary events .

 = = = Historic districts = = =

 Meridian has nine historic districts that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The Meridian Downtown Historic District is a combination of two older districts , the Meridian Urban Center Historic District and the Union Station Historic District . Many architectural styles are present in the districts , most from the late 19th and early 20th centuries , including Queen Anne , Colonial Revival , Italianate , Art Deco , Late Victorian , and Bungalow . The districts are :
 1 East End Historic District — roughly bounded by 18th St , 11th Ave , 14th St , 14th Ave , 5th St , and 17th Ave .
 2 Highlands Historic District — roughly bounded by 15th St , 34th Ave , 19th St , and 36th Ave .
 3 Meridian Downtown Historic District — runs from the former Gulf , Mobile and Ohio Railroad north to 6th St between 18th and 26th Ave , excluding Ragsdale Survey Block 71 .
 4 Meridian Urban Center Historic District — roughly bounded by 21st and 25th Aves , 6th St , and the railroad .
 5 Union Station Historic District — roughly bounded by 18th and 19th Aves , 5th St , and the railroad .
 6 Merrehope Historic District — roughly bounded by 33rd Ave , 30th Ave , 14th St , and 8th St.
 7 Mid @-@ Town Historic District — roughly bounded by 23rd Ave , 15th St , 28th Ave , and 22nd St.
 8 Poplar Springs Road Historic District — roughly bounded by 29th St , 23rd Ave , 22nd St , and 29th Ave .
 9 West End Historic District — roughly bounded by 7th St , 28th Ave , Shearer 's Branch , and 5th St.

 = = Government and infrastructure = =

 Meridian has operated under the mayor @-@ council or " strong mayor " form of government since 1985 . A mayor is elected every four years by the population at @-@ large . The five members of the city council are elected every four years from each of the city 's five wards , considered single @-@ member districts . The mayor , the chief executive officer of the city , is responsible for administering and leading the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of city government . The city council is the legislative arm of the government , setting policy and annually adopting the city 's operating budget .
 City Hall , which has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is located at 601 23rd Avenue . The current mayor is Percy Bland . Members of the city council include Dr. George M. Thomas , representative from Ward 1 , Kenneth Dustin Markham , representative from Ward 2 , Barbara Henson , representative from Ward 3 , Kim Houston , representative from Ward 4 , and Randy Hammon , representative from Ward 5 . The council clerk is Pam McInnis . In total , the city employs 570 people .
 The city established a Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) shortly after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , becoming the only local DHS in the state . The team oversees an area of nine counties . Upon receiving $ 2 @.@ 5 million in grants from the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency and other organizations , the department began training law enforcement offices from other Southern states in passenger rail rescue as well as offering civilian classes in basic handguns , Boy Scout first aid and hunting , and firearms training . The DHS helps during times of crisis such as Hurricane Ivan in September 2005 , when the department helped establish and support shelters for 700 evacuees . The city now serves as the leader of one of the task forces in the Mississippi DHS , a combination of three nine @-@ county teams .
 Headed by police chief Lee Shelbourn since 2009 , the Meridian Police Department consists of 115 full @-@ time officers as well as part @-@ time and reserve staff available . In 2009 , the department 's Criminal Investigations Division responded to 4000 cases , 2000 of which were felonies . In 2000 , 2094 crimes were reported , up slightly from 2008 crimes the preceding year . Meridian has been described as " the safest city in Mississippi with more than 30 @,@ 000 people . " The East Mississippi Correctional Facility is located in unincorporated Lauderdale County , near Meridian . It is operated by the GEO Group on behalf of the Mississippi Department of Corrections . The chief of the Meridian Fire Department is Anthony Clayton . The fire department responded to more than 1600 calls in 2009 , including 123 structural fires and 609 emergency service calls .
 The Mississippi Department of Mental Health operates the East Mississippi State Hospital in Meridian .
 The United States Postal Service operates the Meridian , North Meridian , and the West Meridian Station post offices .
 In state politics , the Mississippi Senate district map divides the city into three sections . The northern tip of the city is in the 31st State Senate District and seats Terry Clark Burton ( R ) . A strip of the city from the southwest corner up to the northeast corner comprises part of the 32nd State Senate District and seats Sampson Jackson , II ( D ) . The western and southeastern portions of the city lie in the 33rd State Senate District and seats Videt Carmichael ( R ) . In the Mississippi House of Representatives districts , the city is divided into four districts . The southern and eastern portions of the city reside in House District 81 and are represented by Steven A. Horne ( R ) . The city 's core makes up the entirety of House District 82 and is represented by Wilbert L. Jones ( D ) . Surrounding House District 82 is House District 83 , represented by Greg Snowden ( R ) . The western section of the city , along with a small section in the north , lie in House District 84 and are represented by Tad Campbell ( R ) .
 On the national level , the city is located in Mississippi 's 3rd congressional district , represented by Gregg Harper ( R ) , who has been in office since 2009 . Lauderdale County , home to Meridian , has voted for the Republican candidate in every United States presidential election since 1972 . Prior to the shift to the Republican Party , white area voters supported Democratic Party candidates , as for decades since the late nineteenth century , it was a one @-@ party state .

 = = Demographics = =

 The city 's growth has reflected the push and pull of many social and economic factors . The total population increased in each census from the city 's founding until 1970 , although varying from rates as high as 165 % to as low as 0 @.@ 2 % . In the 1970 census the population decreased , then slightly increased by 1980 , after which the population slowly declined , increasing again since the turn of the 21st century . Between 1980 and 2000 , the population declined more than 14 % . As of the census of 2000 , the city 's population was 39 @,@ 968 , and the population density was 885 @.@ 9 inhabitants per square mile ( 342 @.@ 0 / km2 ) . In 2008 , the city was the sixth largest in the state . The population increased as of 2010 .
 Meridian is the principal city in the Meridian micropolitan area , which as of 2009 consisted of three counties – Clarke , Kemper , and Lauderdale – and had a population of 106 @,@ 139 . There is a population of 232 @,@ 900 in a 45 @-@ mile ( 72 km ) radius and 526 @,@ 500 in a 65 @-@ mile ( 105 km ) radius .
 While the overall population growth of the city has varied , there has been a steady growth in the number and percentage of non @-@ white residents . The only decline in this group was between 1960 and 1970 , when the city 's overall population declined markedly . In the 2010 Census , the racial makeup of the city was 61 @.@ 55 % African American , 35 @.@ 71 % White , 0 @.@ 9 % Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % Native American , < 0 @.@ 02 % Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 59 % from other races , and 0 @.@ 89 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1 @.@ 75 % of the population .
 According to the 2000 Census , of the 17 @,@ 890 housing units inside city limits , 15 @,@ 966 were occupied , 10 @,@ 033 of them by families . 31 @.@ 1 % of occupied households had children under the age of 18 , 36 @.@ 2 % were married couples living together , 23 @.@ 3 % consisted of a female householder with no husband present , and 37 @.@ 2 % were non @-@ families . 33 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 14 @.@ 0 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 39 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 06 . The average household size has steadily decreased since 1970 , when it was 3 @.@ 04 . Meridian 's median age has increased from 30 @.@ 4 in 1970 to 34 @.@ 6 in 2000 .
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 25 @,@ 085 , and the median income for a family was $ 31 @,@ 062 . Males had a median income of $ 29 @,@ 404 versus $ 19 @,@ 702 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 15 @,@ 255 . About 24 @.@ 6 % of families and 28 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 40 @.@ 8 % of those under age 18 and 22 @.@ 0 % of those age 65 or over .

 = = = Religion = = =

 The population of Meridian and its surrounds is fairly observant , with 65 @.@ 2 % of Lauderdale County identifying as affiliated with some type of religious congregation , compared with the national average of 50 @.@ 2 % . Of the affiliated in 2000 , 30 @,@ 068 ( 59 @.@ 0 % ) were in the Southern Baptist Convention , 9 @,@ 469 ( 18 @.@ 6 % ) were with the United Methodist Church , and 1 @,@ 872 ( 3 @.@ 7 % ) were associated with the Catholic Church .
 Immigrant Jews from Germany and eastern Europe were influential in commercial development of the city , building businesses and services . Congregation Beth Israel was founded in 1868 , just before the city 's " Golden Age . " Meridian once had the largest Jewish community in the state , with 575 Jewish people living in the city in 1927 . Today , fewer than 40 Jews live in Meridian , most of whom are elderly .

 = = Geography and climate = =

 Meridian is located in the North Central Hills region of Mississippi in Lauderdale County . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 45 @.@ 9 sq mi ( 119 km2 ) , of which 45 @.@ 1 sq mi ( 117 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 8 sq mi ( 2 @.@ 1 km2 ) is water . Along major highways , the city is 93 mi ( 150 km ) east of Jackson , Mississippi ; 154 mi ( 248 km ) west of Birmingham , Alabama ; 202 mi ( 325 km ) northeast of New Orleans , Louisiana ; 231 mi ( 372 km ) southeast of Memphis , Tennessee ; and 297 mi ( 478 km ) west of Atlanta , Georgia . The area surrounding the city is covered with cotton and corn fields along with oak and pine forests , and its topography consists of clay hills and the bottom lands of the head waters of the Chickasawhay River .
 The natural terrain of the area has been modified in the urban core of the city by grading , but it maintains its gentle rolling character in the outlying areas . Numerous small creeks are found throughout the city and small lakes and woodlands lie in the northern and southern portions of the city . Sowashee Creek runs through the southern portion of the city and branches off into Gallagher 's Creek , which flows through the center of the city . Loper 's Creek runs through the far @-@ western part of the city while smaller creeks including Shearer 's Branch , Magnolia Creek , and Robbins Creek are dispersed throughout the city .
 Meridian is in the humid subtropical climate zone . The average high temperature during summer ( June through August ) is around 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) and the average low is around 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . In winter ( December through February ) the average maximum is around 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) and minimum 35 ° F ( 2 ° C ) . The warmest month is July , with an average high of 92 @.@ 9 ° F ( 33 @.@ 8 ° C ) , and the coldest month of the year is January with an average low of 34 @.@ 7 ° F ( 1 @.@ 5 ° C ) .
 The average annual precipitation in the city is 58 @.@ 65 in ( 1 @,@ 490 mm ) . Rainfall is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year , and the wettest month of the year is March , in which an average of 6 @.@ 93 in ( 176 mm ) of rain falls . Much rainfall is delivered by thunderstorms which are common during the summer months but occur throughout the year . Severe thunderstorms - which can produce damaging winds and / or large hail in addition to the usual hazards of lightning and heavy rain - occasionally occur . These are most common during the spring months with a secondary peak during the Fall months . These storms also bring the risk of tornadoes .

 = = Economy = =

 Early on , the economy depended greatly upon the railroads in the area . The city was the largest in Mississippi around the start of the 20th century , with five major rail lines and 44 trains coming in and out daily . The city 's economy not only depended on the rails but the goods , such as timber and cotton , transported on them . With these rail @-@ based industries , the city was a great economic power in the state and region from about 1890 through 1930 . Though its economy slowed with the decline of the railroading industry in the 1950s , the city has adapted , moving from a largely rail @-@ based economy to a more diversified one , with healthcare , military , and manufacturing employing the most people .
 Along with Lauderdale County and the city of Marion , Meridian is served by the East Mississippi Business Development Corporation , which was formed in 1996 by a group of business leaders from the area . While as of April 2010 , the city 's civilian labor force was only 15 @,@ 420 people , there is a population of 232 @,@ 900 in a 45 @-@ mile ( 72 km ) radius and 526 @,@ 500 in a 65 @-@ mile ( 105 km ) radius , of which 104 @,@ 600 and 234 @,@ 200 people respectively are in the labor force . The city thus serves as a hub of employment , retail , health care , and culture activities . Eighty percent of Lauderdale County 's workers reside in the county while 90 % live within 45 miles .
 In April 2010 , there were 6 @,@ 260 people employed in the healthcare field in Lauderdale County . Rush Hospital is the largest healthcare organization in the region , employing 2 @,@ 610 people , followed by East Mississippi State Hospital with 1 @,@ 500 and Anderson Hospital with 1 @,@ 475 . There are three hospitals in Meridian , as well as many other healthcare @-@ related facilities . Jeff Anderson Regional Medical Center provides cardiovascular surgery , a Level II newborn intensive @-@ care unit , and a health and fitness center . Rush Foundation Hospital and the related Rush Health Systems operate a Specialty Hospital of Meridian , which offers long @-@ term care for non @-@ permanent patients who require more recovery time in a hospital setting . Riley Hospital has two centers for stroke treatment and rehabilitation services . Other healthcare facilities in Meridian include the Alliance Health Center and East Mississippi State Hospital , the latter of which has been in operation since 1882 .
 Retail is another major employer in the county , with 5 @,@ 280 people employed in April 2010 . Nearly $ 2 billion annually is spent on retail purchases in the city . The 633 @,@ 685 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 58 @,@ 871 m2 ) Bonita Lakes Mall offers over one hundred shopping venues , including department stores , specialty shops , restaurants , eateries , and United Artists Theatres . Phase I of the construction of Meridian Crossroads , a 375 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 34 @,@ 800 m2 ) shopping center in the Bonita Lakes area , was completed in November 2007 , providing a major boost to retail in the area . Also , the shopping district on North Hills Street has continued to expand , and in March 2007 , additional retail and office space was opened near the Highway 19 Walmart Supercenter .
 The area is also served by two military facilities , Naval Air Station Meridian and Key Field , which supply over 4 @,@ 000 jobs to residents of the surrounding area . NAS Meridian provides training for naval carrier pilots and other enlisted personnel . Also housed at the base is the Regional Counter @-@ Drug Training Academy ( RCTA ) , which provides narcotics training for law enforcement in many southeastern states . Containing the first local Department of Homeland Security in the state , the city is the leader in a nine county regional response team and a twenty @-@ nine county regional response task force . Key Field is the site of the famous flight by brothers Fred and Al Key , who set a world endurance flight record in 1935 . Key Field is now home to the 186th Air Refueling Wing of the Air National Guard and a support facility for the 185th Aviation Brigade of the Army National Guard . The site also contains an exhibit reviewing the history of aviation , and is the home of Meridian 's Aviation Museum .
 The total manufacturing employment of Lauderdale County in April 2010 was 2 @,@ 850 people . Peavey Electronics Corporation , which has manufactured guitars , amplifiers , and sound equipment since 1965 , operates its headquarters in the city . Other businesses in the area include Avery Dennison , Structural Steel Services , Sara Lee , Tower Automotive , and Teikuro Corporation . The city is also home to four industrial parks .
 In downtown , the MSU Riley Center provides revenue from tourism , arts , and entertainment sales . The Riley Center attracts more than 60 @,@ 000 visitors to downtown Meridian annually for conferences , meetings , and performances . Loeb 's Department Store on Front St has remained a Mississippi clothing landmark , having passed through four generations of family ownership . The store has been selling fine men 's and women 's clothing since 1887 , when the store was first opened by Alex Loeb .

 = = Culture = =


 = = = Arts = = =

 Known for more than a century of arts , Meridian contains many art and cultural organizations and hosts many cultural events . One of the first art organizations in the city , The Meridian Art League , was established in February 1933 . Art exhibitions were originally held in Lamar Hotel in downtown Meridian , but after a name change to Meridian Art Association in 1949 , exhibitions were held at various locations around the city . After the Carnegie library at 25th Ave and 7th St was closed , the Art Association remodelled the building into the Meridian Museum of Art to serve as a permanent home for exhibits . The museum was opened in 1970 and has since featured rotating exhibitions as well as many educational programs for both students and adults . Over thirty exhibitions are held annually , ranging from traditional decorative arts to ethnographic and tribal materials , photography , crafts , and many other works of art . The collection also includes 18th and 19th century portraits , 20th century photography , and several sculptures .
 The Meridian Council for the Arts ( MCA ) was founded as Meridian 's and Lauderdale County 's official arts agency in 1978 . MCA operates its Community Art Grants program , the annual Threefoot Festival , several workshops , and other special events each year . MCA is partnered with many arts organizations in the city and county including the Meridian Museum of Art , the Meridian Little Theatre , and the Meridian Symphony Orchestra . Meridian Little Theatre , one of the South 's oldest subscription @-@ based community theatres , was built in 1932 and currently provides entertainment to residents of and visitors to Meridian and Lauderdale County , entertaining over 22 @,@ 000 guests each season , making it Mississippi 's most @-@ attended community theatre . The Meridian Symphony Orchestra ( MSO ) – founded in 1961 – played its first concert in 1962 and its first full season in 1963 . In 1965 the MSO booked its first international soloist , Elena Nikolaidi , to perform with the orchestra . The Orchestra helped the Meridian Public School District develop its own orchestra and strings programs and also helped develop the Meridian Symphony Chorus . The current conductor is Dr. Claire Fox Hillard , who has been with the orchestra since 1991 . The MSO will celebrate its 50th anniversary in February 2011 with a performance from Itzhak Perlman .
 The city 's former Grand Opera House was built in 1889 by two half brothers , Israel Marks and Levi Rothenberg . During its operation the opera house hosted many famous artists and works , the first being a German company 's rendition of Johann Strauss II 's " The Gypsy Baron " . After closing in the late 1920s due to the Great Depression , the opera house was abandoned for nearly 70 years . A $ 10 million grant in 2000 by the Riley Foundation , a local foundation chartered in 1998 , sparked the building 's restoration while $ 15 million came from a combination of city , county , and federal grants . The opera house 's renovation was completed in September 2006 under the new name " Mississippi State University Riley Center for Education and Performing Arts . " The Riley Center , which includes a 950 @-@ seat auditorium for live performances , a 200 @-@ seat studio theater , and 30 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 2 @,@ 787 m2 ) of meeting space , attracts more than 60 @,@ 000 visitors to downtown Meridian annually for conferences , meetings , and performances .
 Meridian is rightly considered an architectural treasure trove being one the nations most intact cities from the turn of the last century . Architecture students from around the nation and Canada are known to visit Meridian in groups as part of their coursework due to numerous structures in the city having been designed by noted architects . The only home in the US south designed by noted Canadian born Architect Louis S. Curtiss , famous for inventing the glass curtain wall skyscraper , is extant on Highland Park . The Frank Fort designed Threefoot Building is generally considered one of the best Art Deco skyscrapers in the US and is often compared to Detroit 's famed Fisher Building . Noted California Architect Wallace Neff designed a number of homes in Meridian as well as in the Alabama Black Belt which adjoins the city across the nearby Alabama State line . He had relatives in Meridian and Selma who were executives in the then thriving railroad industry and would take commissions in the area when commissions in California were lean . His work is mostly concentrated in the lower numbered blocks of Poplar Springs Drive where his 2516 Poplar Springs Drive is often compared to the similarly designed Falcon Lair , the Beverly Hills home in Benedict Canyon of Rudolph Valentino . One Neff work was lost to an expansion of Anderson Hospital in 1990 and another in Marion Park burned in the 1950s . The Meridian Post Office with its interior done entirely of bronze and Verde marble is also noteworthy as a very fine example of the type of Post Office structures built in thriving and well to do cities in the 1920s and originally had Lalique lighting which was removed sadly during a 1960s remodeling and which are now in private residences on Poplar Springs Drive and in North Hills .
 Meridian has also been selected as the future location of the Mississippi Arts and Entertainment Center ( MAEC ) . The Mississippi Legislature approved the idea in 2001 and in 2006 promised $ 4 million in funding if private contributors could raise $ 8 million . The city donated $ 50 @,@ 000 to the cause in September 2007 . The MAEC , as proposed , would be located on 175 acres ( 71 ha ) at Bonita Lakes and consist of an outdoor amphitheatre , an indoor concert hall , and a Hall of Fame honoring Mississippi artists . The Hall of Fame will be located downtown in the old Montana 's building . That property and the adjacent Meridian Hotel building were acquired in July 2010 for $ 300 @,@ 000 . In February 2009 , the MAEC revealed its Walk of Fame outside of the Riley Center in an attempt to promote the planned Hall of Fame . The first star on the walk was dedicated to Jimmie Rodgers , a Meridian native . In September of the same year , the second star was revealed , recognizing B.B. King , a famous blues musician from Mississippi . On June 1 , 2010 , authors Tennessee Williams , Eudora Welty , and William Faulkner were added to the walk . Sela Ward was added to the walk on June 24 , 2010 . The MAEC plans to add many more Mississippi @-@ born stars to the Walk of Fame ; names mentioned include Morgan Freeman , Jimmy Buffett , Elvis Presley , Conway Twitty , and others .
 Another location in the city used for large productions is the Hamasa Shrine Temple Theater . The Temple Theater houses a 778 @-@ pipe Robert Morgan organ , one of two Theater Organs still in their original installations in the state . With seating for 1800 persons , the silent movie era was a prosperous time for the Temple . At the time , it was one of the largest stages in the United States , second only to the Roxy Theater in New York City . Today , seating 1576 persons , the Temple is used year @-@ round for area events , live stage shows , plays , concerts , Hamasa Shrine functions , and public screenings of classic movies .
 Highland Park houses a Jimmie Rodgers museum which displays the original guitar of " The Singing Brakeman " and other memorabilia of his life and career , as well as railroad equipment from the steam @-@ engine era . In addition to the museum building itself , there are outside memorials , and a vintage steam locomotive on display . A Mississippi Blues Trail historic marker has been placed in Meridian to honor the city as the birthplace of Jimmie Rodgers and emphasizes his importance to the development of the blues style of music in Mississippi . The city was the first site to receive this designation outside the Mississippi Delta . Also , a Mississippi Country Music Trail marker was placed in Oak Grove Cemetery in honor of Rodgers on June 1 , 2010 . Each year since 1953 , the city has held a festival during May to honor the anniversary of his death .
 The park is also home to a 19th @-@ century carousel manufactured around 1895 by Gustav Dentzel of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Highland Park Dentzel Carousel has been in operation since 1909 , is a National Historic Landmark , and is the world 's only two @-@ row stationary Dentzel menagerie in existence . Its house is the only remaining original carousel building built from a Dentzel blueprint . Around Town Carousels Abound is a public arts project of 62 carousel horses , representing the historic carousel . Sixty @-@ two pieces have been sponsored by local businesses and citizens , and design of the horses was conceived and painted by local artists . They are placed throughout the city and county .

 = = = Recreation = = =

 The city contains several recreational parks , including Highland Park , Bonita Lakes , and Okatibbee Lake . Highland Park contains picnic shelters , swimming pools , tennis courts , a baseball field , softball fields , and a playground , all open year round to visitors . Bonita Lakes is a city @-@ owned , 3 @,@ 300 @-@ acre ( 13 km2 ) park including three lakes . The park also includes the Long Creek Reservoir and Lakeview Municipal Golf Course , along with nature trails , a jogging and walking track , biking paths , horseback riding trails , pavilions , picnic facilities , boat ramps , paddle boats , concessions , and fishing . Along with the lakes , the Bonita Lakes area includes Bonita Lakes Mall , Bonita Lakes Crossing , and Bonita Lakes Plaza . Okatibbee Lake is a 7 @,@ 150 @-@ acre ( 28 @.@ 9 km2 ) establishment containing a 4 @,@ 144 @-@ acre ( 16 @.@ 77 km2 ) lake which offers boating , fishing , swimming , water skiing , picnicking , hunting , hiking and camping . Splashdown Country Water Park , a 25 @-@ room motel , and cabins are located on the lake .
 Since 1992 , Meridian has been a host of the State Games of Mississippi , a statewide annual multi @-@ sport event modeled after the Olympic Games . The organization is a member of the National Congress of State Games , which is affiliated with the U.S. Olympic Committee . In its first year 1 @,@ 200 athletes competed in twelve sports , and since then over 70 @,@ 000 athletes have participated in the Games . In 2009 , more than 4500 athletes participated in 27 sports . All competitors in the games can compete in the Southeast Sports Festival while medalists may move up to the bi @-@ annual State Games of America .
 Originally the games were held in one weekend in June , but as more sports were added , the event was expanded to two weekends . Opening ceremonies always begin on the 3rd Friday of June in downtown Meridian . The games are held at several sports parks , including Northeast Park , Sammie Davidson Complex , and other various fields throughout the city . Northeast Park is an 85 @-@ acre ( 34 ha ) park on Highway 39 that contains ten tennis courts , four softball fields , three soccer fields , an asphalt track , and a large picnic pavilion . The Sammie Davidson Sports Complex includes six tennis courts , four softball fields , and a half @-@ mile track . Other sports fields include the Meridian Jaycee Soccer Complex , Sykes Park , and Phil Hardin Park .
 There are also several golf courses in the city , including the aforementioned Lakeview Municipal Golf Course , an 18 @-@ hole course open to the public daily . Briarwood County Club , located on Highway 39 North , is a private club with golf , swimming , fishing , and dining facilities . Other golf courses serving the city include Northwood Country Club , Okatibbee Creek Golf Center , and Ponta Creek Golf Course .

 = = Transportation = =


 = = = Railroads and public transit = = =

 Amtrak 's Crescent line connects Meridian with the cities of New York , New York ; Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; Baltimore , Maryland ; Washington , D.C. ; Charlotte , North Carolina ; Atlanta , Georgia ; Birmingham , Alabama ; and New Orleans , Louisiana . The Union Station Multi @-@ Modal Transportation Center ( MMTC ) is located at 1901 Front Street , part of the Meridian Downtown Historic District , which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Originally built in 1906 , but later demolished in 1966 then rebuilt in 1997 , the station includes several modes of transportation including the Meridian Transit System , Amtrak , Norfolk Southern rail corridor , Greyhound buses , Trailways and other providers of transit services . The number of passengers on Amtrak trains , Greyhound buses , and Meridian Transit System buses averages 242 @,@ 360 per year .

 = = = Air = = =

 The city is served by Meridian Regional Airport , located at Key Field , 2811 Airport Boulevard South , 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of the city . At 10 @,@ 004 foot ( 3 @,@ 049 m ) , the airport 's runway is the longest public runway in Mississippi . The airport , which has been in service since 1930 , offers daily flights to Dallas / Fort Worth , TX .
 During the Great Depression , residents of the city contemplated abandoning the airport because of the cost of maintenance , but in 1935 Brothers Fred and Al Key , managers of the airport , thought of a way to keep the airport operating . From June 4 until July 1 , 1935 , the brothers flew over the city in their plane , the " Ole Miss . " The record they established in their 27 days aloft , totaling 653 hours and 34 minutes , attracted enough publicity and funds to the city to keep the airport running . Key Field is therefore named after the brothers , whose flight endurance record remains unbroken in conventional flight .

 = = = Highways = = =

 Interstate Highways
 Interstate 20
 Runs west through Jackson , Mississippi , eventually terminating near Kent , Texas , and east through Tuscaloosa , Alabama , eventually terminating in Florence , South Carolina . Interstate 59
 Joins with I @-@ 20 in the city and runs north through Tuscaloosa , Alabama , ending in Wildwood , Georgia . It also runs south through Hattiesburg , Mississippi , and on to Slidell , Louisiana .
 U.S. Highways
 U.S. Highway 11
 Runs parallel to Interstate 59 south to New Orleans , Louisiana , and north all the way to the Canada – US border . U.S. Highway 45
 Transnational route which runs north through Columbus , Mississippi , to the US @-@ Canada border and south through Quitman , Mississippi , to Mobile , Alabama , and the Gulf of Mexico . U.S. Highway 80
 Runs west through Jackson , Mississippi , to Dallas , Texas , and east through Demopolis , Alabama , all the way to Tybee Island , Georgia and the Atlantic Ocean .
 State Highways
 Mississippi Highway 19
 Runs north to West , Mississippi , and south to the Mississippi @-@ Alabama border , where it continues as Alabama State Route 10 . Mississippi Highway 39
 Begins in Meridian and runs north to Shuqualak , Mississippi . Mississippi Highway 145
 Formerly US 45 , but now only exists as an alternate route in several cities . Mississippi Highway 493
 Begins in Meridian and runs north to Lynville , Mississippi .

 = = Education = =

 Early public education in Meridian was based on the 1870 Mississippi Constitution . From 1870 to 1885 , trustees appointed by the City Council served on the Board of School Directors , which had authority to operate the schools . Although there were several schools in the city before 1884 , they were privately owned and only enrolled about 400 students . The city did not build its first publicly owned school until September 1884 . The first public school for blacks in the city was held in facilities rented from St. Paul Methodist Church . The Mississippi Legislature amended the city charter in January 1888 to allow the city to maintain its own municipal school district , and in March of the same year $ 30 @,@ 000 in bonds was approved for the city to build new public schools . From this bond , the Wechsler School was built in 1894 , becoming the first brick public school building in the state built for blacks .
 From this early district and later additions , the Meridian Public School District grew to its current size , which now includes six elementary schools , 3 middle schools , and 3 high schools . The city also contains several private schools including Lamar School , Calvary Christian School , Community Christian School , and St. Patrick 's Catholic School . The campus of Meridian High School , the main high school in the district , occupies 37 acres ( 15 ha ) , including six buildings and 111 classrooms . The school is made up of grades 10 @-@ 12 and enrolls approximately 1 @,@ 500 students .
 Meridian is home to two post @-@ secondary educational institutions . Meridian Community College , founded in 1937 , is located at 910 Highway 19 N and offers free tuition for four semesters to graduates from the Meridian Public and Lauderdale County School Districts as well as homeschooled children who reside inside Lauderdale County . Originally known as Meridian Junior College and located at Meridian High School , the college moved to its present location in 1965 . After desegregation laws were passed , MJC merged with T.J. Harris Junior College in 1970 , which had previously enrolled African @-@ American students . The name change from Meridian Junior College to Meridian Community College took place In 1987 " to more accurately reflect the diversity of opportunities it provides for a growing community area . " Mississippi State University also operates a campus in the city . As of the Fall 2008 semester , 763 students from 33 counties throughout the state and several in Alabama attended the college .
 Meridian is served by the Meridian @-@ Lauderdale County Public Library , located at the corner of 7th Street and 26th Avenue . The city originally had two Carnegie libraries , both built in 1913 – one for blacks and one for whites . A group of women had formed the Fortnightly Book and Magazine Club in the 1880s and began raising money to build a library for the city . The books they collected and shared within the club were later the basis of the library collection for Meridian . With wide support for the library , the club enlisted Israel Marks , a city leader , to approach the national philanthropist Andrew Carnegie for funding assistance . The library for blacks was built at 13th Street and 28th Avenue on land donated by St. Paul Methodist Church , and the library for whites was established in a building originally owned by members of the First Presbyterian Church of Meridian , who sold it to the city on September 25 , 1911 . The African American library was the only library for blacks in the state until after World War I and is the only Carnegie library ever built for African Americans in the country . The two libraries served the city until 1967 , when the institutions became integrated because of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , combined their collections , and moved all materials to their current location . The former white library was renovated and converted into the Meridian Museum of Art in 1970 , and the former African @-@ American library was demolished on May 28 , 2008 .

 = = Media = =

 The only daily newspaper printed in the city is The Meridian Star , which has been in operation since 1898 . The paper was originally named The Evening Star but was renamed in 1915 and has been Meridian 's only daily newspaper since 1921 . With a daily circulation of about 12 @,@ 000 in March 2010 , the paper serves Lauderdale County as well as adjacent portions of western Alabama and eastern Mississippi .
 Though the Meridian Star is now the only newspaper printed in the city , there have been a few other historical newspapers . One such paper is the Memo Digest , a ten to twenty page publication published during the 1970s . The Digest focused on issues relevant to the African @-@ American population of the region , gathering a circulation of about 5 @,@ 000 people . Other newspapers in the city have included The Colored Messenger , The State , The Weekly Mercury , The Blade , Weekly Echo , Fair Play , Headlight , Meridian Morning Sun , Teacher and Preacher , and Clarion .
 The city is the principal city in the Meridian , Mississippi Designated Market Area ( DMA ) , which includes 72 @,@ 180 households with televisions . WTOK @-@ TV broadcasts as an ABC affiliate from the city , headquartered at 815 23rd Avenue . WTOK operates two digital subchannels , WTOK @-@ DT2 , a MyNetworkTV affiliate , and WTOK @-@ DT3 , Meridian 's CW . WGBC @-@ TV , the market 's NBC affiliate , is headquartered at 1151 Crestview Circle . Since January 5 , 2009 , WGBC has also been the market 's FOX affiliate , and it also features some programming from the Retro Television Network ( RTN ) . WGBC operates under a program services agreement with WMDN @-@ TV , the market 's CBS affiliate which operates a local AccuWeather service on its second subchannel . WMAW @-@ TV is the local affiliate of Mississippi Public Broadcasting .
 The city is also the principal city in the Meridian Arbitron Radio Market , which includes 64 @,@ 500 people over the age of 12 . WJXM ( FM 105 @.@ 7 ) , headquartered at 3436 Highway 45 North , takes the largest share of ratings in the market at 14 @.@ 8 % in Fall 2009 . In the same period , WZKS ( FM 104 @.@ 1 ) was second with 11 @.@ 1 % , and WMOX ( AM 1010 ) was third with 7 @.@ 4 % . Other popular stations in the market include WUCL ( FM 97 @.@ 9 ) , WOKK ( FM 97 @.@ 1 ) , WEXR ( FM 106 @.@ 9 ) , WYHL ( AM 1450 ) , and WKZB ( FM 95 @.@ 1 ) . Mississippi Public Broadcasting can be found on WMAW @-@ FM ( FM 88 @.@ 1 ) .

 = = Notable people = =

 Meridian has produced or hosted many famous people in the arts and other areas . For example :

 = = = In acting = = =

 Alvin Childress , who played the lead role in the Amos ' n ' Andy Show , was born in the city in 1907 .
 Diane Ladd was also born in the city in 1932 @,@
 Sela Ward was born in Meridian , in 1956 .

 = = = In business and politics = = =

 Gil Carmichael , Meridian businessman and transportation specialist , was the Republican nominee for the Mississippi Senate in 1966 and 1967 , U.S. Senate in 1972 , governor in 1975 and 1979 , and lieutenant governor in 1983 .
 Winfield Dunn , former Governor of Tennessee , lived in Meridian
 John Fleming , current U.S. Representative for Louisiana 's 4th congressional district lived in Meridian ;
 The late Lieutenant Governor Carroll Gartin , who was born in Meridian , lived in Laurel ;
 Lewis McAllister , a businessman in Tuscaloosa , Alabama , was the first Republican to serve in the Mississippi House of Representatives since Reconstruction , 1962 @-@ 1968 ; he resided in Meridian prior to 1971 .
 Gillespie V. Montgomery , former U.S. Representative , lived in Meridian
 Hartley Peavey , founder of Peavey Electronics which is headquartered in Meridian , is a Meridian native .
 Tom Stuart from 1973 to 1977 was the first Republican to serve as mayor of Meridian in the 20th century .

 = = = In broadcasting = = =

 Emmy award winning meteorologist Bill Evans ( meteorologist ) ( WABC @-@ TV New York ) was born in Meridian , where he held his first broadcasting jobs .

 = = = In literature and comics = = =

 Novelist Edwin Granberry , who won the 1932 O. Henry Award for Best Short Short Story , was born in Meridian . For 30 years , Granberry wrote the Buz Sawyer comic strip . Meridian is the birthplace of novelist and short story writer Barry Hannah .

 = = = In music = = =

 Classical composer John Luther Adams is a Meridian native .
 The Island Def Jam rapper Big K.R.I.T. was born in Meridian . K.R.I.T is known for his many mixtapes and albums such as K.R.I.T. Wuz Here and Cadillactica . He has gained a large following for his lyricism and self @-@ produced beats as well as his ability to change his style on songs from slow and conscious tracks ( " The Vent " ) to fiery and upbeat tracks ( " Mt . Olympus " ) .
 The guitarist @-@ songwriter George Cummings , born in Meridian in 1938 , was a founding member of Dr. Hook & the Medicine Show .
 Paul Davis , a singer @-@ songwriter best known for the late 1970s and early 1980s pop hits " I Go Crazy " and " ' 65 Love Affair " , was born in Meridian in 1948 ; after retiring from the music business , he returned to the city where he remained until a fatal heart attack in 2008 .
 Chris Ethridge ( February 10 , 1947 – April 23 , 2012 ) was an American country rock bass guitarist . He was a member of the International Submarine Band ( ISB ) and The Flying Burrito Brothers , and he co @-@ wrote several songs with Gram Parsons . Ethridge worked with Jackson Browne , Judy Collins , Ry Cooder , Whitney Houston , Willie Nelson , Randy Newman , Linda Ronstadt , Leon Russell , Nancy Sinatra , Johnny Winter , and The Byrds .
 The singer @-@ songwriter Steve Forbert was born in Meridian in 1954 .
 Jimmie Rodgers , the " Father of Country Music " , was born in the city in 1897 . The Jimmie Rodgers Museum is located in Meridian , and the Jimmie Rodgers Festival has been an annual Meridian event since 1953 .
 David Ruffin , former lead singer of The Temptations , and his older brother Jimmy Ruffin were born in the surrounding area , Whynot and Collinsville , respectively .
 George Soulé , the singer @-@ songwriter most famous for the rhythm and blues anthem " Get Involved " , is a resident of Meridian , where he was born in 1945 .
 Hayley Williams , lead singer of the band Paramore , was also born in the city in 1988 .
 Singer Al Wilson , born in June 1939 , was a Meridian native .

 = = = In sports = = =

 The city has also been home to several athletes , many of whom have competed at professional levels . Among them are : Dennis Ray " Oil Can " Boyd , former Major League Baseball pitcher ; Negro league baseball catcher Paul Hardy ; professional basketball player Derrick McKey ; Jay Powell , another pitcher ; Joe Stringfellow played in the NFL ; professional basketball player George Wilson

 = = = Others = = =

 Other notable natives of the city include :
 Susan Akin who won the Miss America beauty pageant in 1986 @,@
 James Chaney - one of the victims of the Mississippi civil rights workers murders in 1964 @,@
 Fred and Al Key , known as " The Flying Keys " - holders of the world flight endurance record - are Meridian natives . Al Key is also a former mayor of the city .
 Fred Phelps , leader of the Westboro Baptist Church ,

 = = In popular culture = =


 = = = Fictional characters = = =

 Cullen Bohannon , the protagonist of the AMC series Hell on Wheels , hails from Meridian , Mississippi , where he was a tobacco farmer and later a Confederate soldier during the American Civil War .
 Dill Harris , one of the characters of the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novel To Kill a Mockingbird ( 1960 ) , is from Meridian , which is mentioned throughout when referencing Dill 's home .
